# nbaplayerclustering
Clustering NBA Players Based on Advanced Stats from Basketball-Reference.com

The goal of any player clustering algorithm is to figure out how players and their approach to the game relate to each other. In other words, which players play similarly to other players. Take for example LeBron James. Which player approaches the game most similarly to him? The short answer is not many, because it's Lebron. But nevertheless there are players who are skilled scorers, passers, and defenders, and they will compare best to LeBron.

This isn't simply about comparing similar play styles, although it is that too. A player like Andre Iguodala approaches the game of basketball almost identically to LeBron: he's a decent scorer, decent passer, decent rebounder, and a great defender. The problem is he's only relatively decent at those things while LeBron excels at all of them. So Iguodala would compare favorably to LeBron but still might not be the best comp. On the other hand, you might have someone like Kevin Durant, whose game has aspects that are a bit different than LeBron's (Durant's a better shooter, for one), but because he also adds similar high value as an overall player, he might comp better to LeBron than someone like Iguodala, who has an almost identical style but is not as valuable overall. What this player cluster algorithm distills down to is this: it finds players who have similar styles AND similar value.

Advanced metrics considered in this algorithm: true shooting %, three point attempt rate, free throw rate, o-rebound %, assist %, turnover %, usage %, steal %, block %, defensive box plus/minus, and DRAYMOND, which is FiveThirtyEight's proprietary metric for measuring the ability to disrupt opponents' shots without blocking them, a crucial skill that's absent from standard box score info and even many advanced stats. Position and age are also considered, primarily to give the algorithm a base idea of the physical build and energy level of players.

The algorithm scrapes its data from basketball-reference.com and also directly imports its DRAYMOND data from FiveThirtyEight. Because the resulting data is highly dimensional (13 dimensions), the algorithm employs PCA to pare it down to three dimensions which explain 64.23% of the variance in the original data. Next, KMeans is used to cluster the reduced-dimensional data into five clusters, chosen to represent the five standard positional groups in the NBA. LDA is then employed to reduce the three-dimensional, five-cluster data down to two dimensions along clustered lines (targets). Finally, KMeans clustering is applied to the data once more (seven clusters, determined by elbow method). The data is then graphed and clusters are identified.
